# MySQL database engine

> 💡 Instructions about how to use this project can be found [here](../README.md).

So far we explored the `MergeTree` engine family and `external dictionaries`.
Now we'll get into a more a different integration between ClickHouse and MySQL.

According to the docs:

> [MySQL engine] allows to connect to databases on a remote MySQL server and perform INSERT and SELECT queries to exchange data between ClickHouse and MySQL.

https://clickhouse.tech/docs/en/engines/database-engines/mysql/

- [MySQL database engine](#mysql-database-engine)
  - [Schema creation](#schema-creation)
  - [Let's use it](#lets-use-it)
  - [Wrapping up](#wrapping-up)

## Schema creation

As you might remember, in this project we already have a fully working `MariaDB` (drop-in MySQL replacement) instance with [Sakila's sample database](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/sakila/en/) that we can use to test all sorts of integrations between ClickHouse and MySQL.

Let's create a database to test this all:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS mysqlng 
ENGINE = MySQL('mariadb:3306', 'sakila', 'root', 'pass')
```

```sql
use mysqlng;
```

```sql
show tables;
```

Magically, you can now see all MySQL/MariaDB's tables!

Now imagine we had in ClickHouse a table where we store all the ratings for each film.
Of course we have to use another database since `mysqlng` doesn't support table creation.
For now we'll just store it in the default database;

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS default.rating
(
    film_id UInt32,
    rating Float32
) ENGINE = Memory();

```

Wait, wait! What is this `Memory` engine? It is what you expect it to be: data is stored in memory and not persisted. It's useful for quick demos and tests!

https://clickhouse.tech/docs/en/engines/table-engines/special/memory/

## Let's use it

Now let's fill the rating table with random ratings.

```sql
INSERT INTO default.rating SELECT
    rand() % 1000,
    (rand() % 50) / 10
FROM numbers(5000000);
```

To aggregate this amount of data is usually expensive in MySQL, so we can process it in ClickHouse and join the results with MySQL tables to finally find the top rated movies.

```sql
SELECT
    ratings.film_id,
    ratings.rating,
    films.title
FROM 
(
    SELECT
        film_id,
        round(avg(rating), 1) AS rating
    FROM default.rating
    GROUP BY film_id
) AS ratings
INNER JOIN 
(
    SELECT
        film_id,
        title
    FROM mysqlng.film
) AS films ON ratings.film_id = toUInt32(films.film_id)
ORDER BY ratings.rating DESC 
LIMIT 10;

```

## Wrapping up

MySQL Engine doesn't support `updates`  nor `creates`, still, it's a very useful way to JOIN data.  
**Important**: remember it does support INSERTS!

Let's do some housekeeping:

```sql
DROP TABLE default.rating SYNC;
```

```sql
DROP DATABASE mysqlng SYNC;
```

(this operation, doesn't drop the data in MySQL!)
